<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE concept PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Concept//EN" "concept.dtd">
<!--
  SEO keyword phrase: markdown-validator multiple rule sets monorepo multi-ruleset
  Audience: user, rule-creator
-->
<concept id="c_multiple-rulesets">
  <title>Working with multiple rule sets</title>

  <shortdesc>A single repository can contain content that must meet different
  editorial standards — for example, a tutorial section and an API reference
  section with distinct metadata requirements. Use separate rule set files and
  specify the correct one at runtime with the <codeph>--rules</codeph>
  option.</shortdesc>

  <prolog>
    <metadata>
      <keywords>
        <keyword>multiple rule sets</keyword>
        <keyword>monorepo validation</keyword>
        <keyword>per-product rules</keyword>
        <keyword>CI matrix strategy</keyword>
      </keywords>
      <othermeta name="description"
        content="Learn when and how to use more than one rule set in a single repository: per-product standards, CI matrix jobs, and how to prevent local vs CI rule mismatch."/>
      <othermeta name="version" content="markdown-validator 0.2"/>
      <othermeta name="last-updated" content="2026-03-20"/>
    </metadata>
  </prolog>

  <conbody>

    <section id="why-multiple">
      <title>When to use more than one rule set</title>
      <p>A single rule set works well when all content in the repository
      follows the same standards. Use multiple rule sets when:</p>
      <ul>
        <li><b>Different content types have different metadata requirements.</b>
        For example, tutorial articles must have <codeph>ms.topic:
        tutorial</codeph> and a "Prerequisites" section, while API reference
        articles do not.</li>
        <li><b>Different teams own different subdirectories</b> and maintain
        their own editorial standards independently.</li>
        <li><b>You are migrating from one standard to another</b> and need to
        run the old rule set against existing content and the new rule set
        against new content simultaneously.</li>
        <li><b>One rule set is shared across repositories</b> (for example, a
        base style standard) while each repository adds its own
        product-specific rules on top.</li>
      </ul>
    </section>

    <section id="specifying-rules">
      <title>Specifying the rule set at runtime</title>
      <p>The <codeph>--rules</codeph> option accepts any path to a JSON rule
      set file. You can run the validator multiple times against different
      directories using different rule sets:</p>

      <codeblock xml:space="preserve"># Validate tutorials with the tutorial rule set
md-validate validate docs/tutorials/ --rules rules/tutorials.json

# Validate API reference with the reference rule set
md-validate validate docs/reference/ --rules rules/api-reference.json</codeblock>

      <p>There is no configuration file that automatically selects the rule
      set. The rule set is always specified explicitly on the command line —
      either by the author running the tool locally or by the CI pipeline.</p>
    </section>

    <section id="how-authors-know">
      <title>How authors know which rule set applies</title>
      <p>Document the rule set path in your repository's contributing guide.
      Common conventions:</p>
      <ul>
        <li><b>By directory</b> — <filepath>docs/tutorials/</filepath> uses
        <filepath>rules/tutorials.json</filepath>, etc.</li>
        <li><b>By front-matter field</b> — <codeph>ms.topic</codeph> value maps
        to a rule set.</li>
        <li><b>Script wrapper</b> — a <filepath>validate.sh</filepath> script
        picks the rule set automatically based on file path.</li>
      </ul>
      <p>Whatever convention you use, the local path must match the one CI uses.</p>
    </section>

    <section id="ci-matrix">
      <title>CI configuration for multiple rule sets</title>
      <p>When you have two or more rule sets, each one should run as a
      separate CI job so that failures in one area do not suppress failures
      in another. Use a GitHub Actions matrix strategy to avoid duplicating
      the job definition:</p>

      <codeblock xml:space="preserve">jobs:
  validate:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    strategy:
      matrix:
        include:
          - docs-dir: docs/tutorials/
            rules-file: rules/tutorials.json
            artifact-name: reports-tutorials
          - docs-dir: docs/reference/
            rules-file: rules/api-reference.json
            artifact-name: reports-reference

    steps:
      - name: Check out repository
        uses: actions/checkout@v4

      - name: Set up Python
        uses: actions/setup-python@v5
        with:
          python-version: '3.12'

      - name: Cache NLTK data
        uses: actions/cache@v4
        with:
          path: ~/nltk_data
          key: nltk-punkt-tagger

      - name: Install markdown-validator
        run: pip install markdown-validator

      - name: Download NLTK language data
        run: python -m nltk.downloader punkt_tab averaged_perceptron_tagger_eng

      - name: Validate documentation
        run: |
          md-validate validate ${{ matrix.docs-dir }} \
            --rules ${{ matrix.rules-file }} \
            --format json \
            --output reports/

      - name: Upload validation reports
        if: always()
        uses: actions/upload-artifact@v4
        with:
          name: ${{ matrix.artifact-name }}
          path: reports/</codeblock>

      <p>Each matrix entry produces a separate check on the pull request. A
      failure in tutorials does not prevent the reference check from running
      and reporting its own result.</p>
    </section>

    <section id="local-ci-mismatch">
      <title>Preventing local vs. CI rule mismatch</title>
      <p>The most common multi-ruleset problem: an author validates with the
      wrong rule set locally and sees different failures in CI.</p>
      <ul>
        <li><b>Commit all rule set files.</b> Never use local copies that
        diverge from source control.</li>
        <li><b>Document the exact command</b> in the contributing guide,
        including the full <codeph>--rules</codeph> path.</li>
        <li><b>Verify the CI <codeph>--rules</codeph> value</b> in
        <filepath>.github/workflows/validate-docs.yml</filepath> matches
        what authors use locally.</li>
        <li><b>Pin shared rule sets</b> if they are shared via a package or
        submodule — uncoordinated updates cause hard-to-trace CI failures.</li>
      </ul>
      <p>If local and CI results differ, check that <codeph>--rules</codeph>
      is identical in both. See also
      <xref href="../../troubleshooting/ts_ci-fails.dita">Resolve a validation failure in CI</xref>.</p>
    </section>

  </conbody>
</concept>
