<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE concept PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Concept//EN" "concept.dtd">
<!--
  SEO keyword phrase: what is markdown-validator documentation validation tool
  Audience: user (technical writer, content author)
-->
<concept id="c_what-is-markdown-validator">
  <title>What is markdown-validator?</title>

  <shortdesc>markdown-validator is a rule-based tool that checks your Markdown files
  against editorial standards defined by your team. It catches missing metadata,
  incorrect front-matter values, and structural problems before your content reaches
  review or publication.</shortdesc>

  <prolog>
    <metadata>
      <keywords>
        <keyword>markdown-validator</keyword>
        <keyword>documentation validation</keyword>
        <keyword>front matter linting</keyword>
        <keyword>content governance</keyword>
      </keywords>
      <othermeta name="description"
        content="Learn what markdown-validator does, why documentation teams use it, and what kinds of problems it catches automatically."/>
      <othermeta name="version" content="markdown-validator 0.2"/>
      <othermeta name="last-updated" content="2026-03-20"/>
    </metadata>
  </prolog>

  <conbody>

    <note type="note" id="version-notice">
      <b>Applies to:</b> markdown-validator 0.2.x (last updated 2026-03-20).
      Planned changes in v0.3 (negation operator) and v0.4 (structured DOM)
      may affect rule behaviour described here.
    </note>

    <note type="important" id="blocked-pr">
      <b>Pull request just blocked?</b> Go to
      <xref href="../tasks/t_validate-single-file.dita">Validate a single file</xref>
      to reproduce the failure locally, then
      <xref href="../tasks/t_read-validation-report.dita">read the validation report</xref>
      to fix it. You do not need to read this topic first.
    </note>

    <section id="the-problem">
      <title>What it does</title>
      <p>Your team defines rules once in a JSON file. The tool applies them to every
      article and reports exactly which rules each file passes or fails — catching
      missing fields, stale dates, wrong values, and structural issues that reviewers
      would otherwise flag manually.</p>

      <p>markdown-validator checks two parts of each file:</p>
      <table id="what-it-checks-table">
        <tgroup cols="2">
          <colspec colname="part" colwidth="1.5*"/>
          <colspec colname="examples" colwidth="3*"/>
          <thead>
            <row><entry>Part</entry><entry>What gets checked</entry></row>
          </thead>
          <tbody>
            <row>
              <entry><b>Front-matter metadata</b> — the YAML <codeph>---</codeph> block</entry>
              <entry>Required fields present, values match allowed values, date is
              recent, naming conventions</entry>
            </row>
            <row>
              <entry><b>Document body</b> — content below the front matter</entry>
              <entry>Exactly one H1, required H2 sections present, heading
              capitalization, no empty sections</entry>
            </row>
          </tbody>
        </tgroup>
      </table>
    </section>

    <section id="how-authors-use-it">
      <title>How you use it</title>
      <ul>
        <li><b>Locally before a pull request</b> — run the tool from the command
        line to catch and fix problems before reviewers see them.</li>
        <li><b>Automatically in CI/CD</b> — the pipeline validates every pull
        request. Required failures block the merge.</li>
      </ul>
      <p>Your content lead maintains the rule set. You run the validator and fix
      what it reports.</p>
    </section>

    <section id="what-you-need">
      <title>What you need</title>
      <ul>
        <li>Python 3.12+</li>
        <li>The rule set file path (ask your content lead; typically
        <filepath>rules/tutorial.json</filepath> in the repository)</li>
      </ul>
      <p>To get started: <xref href="../tasks/t_install.dita">Install markdown-validator</xref>
      | <xref href="c_how-validation-works.dita">How validation works</xref></p>
    </section>

  </conbody>
</concept>
