<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE troubleshooting PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Troubleshooting//EN" "troubleshooting.dtd">
<!--
  SEO keyword phrase: markdown-validator CI pipeline fails GitHub Actions validation
  Audience: user
-->
<troubleshooting id="ts_ci-fails">
  <title>Resolve a validation failure in a CI/CD pipeline</title>

  <shortdesc>When the validation step in your CI pipeline fails, your pull request
  is blocked. This topic shows you how to find the failure report, reproduce the
  failure locally, and resolve the specific issue.</shortdesc>

  <prolog>
    <metadata>
      <keywords>
        <keyword>CI pipeline fails</keyword>
        <keyword>GitHub Actions validation failure</keyword>
        <keyword>pull request blocked</keyword>
        <keyword>validation gate fails</keyword>
      </keywords>
      <othermeta name="description"
        content="Diagnose and fix a markdown-validator step that fails in a CI/CD pipeline, including how to read the failure report and reproduce the failure locally."/>
    </metadata>
  </prolog>

  <troublebody>

    <condition id="condition">
      <title>Situation</title>
      <p>Your pull request shows a failing check in CI. The check is named
      something like <b>Validate documentation</b> or <b>validate</b>. The
      merge button is blocked.</p>
    </condition>

    <troubleSolution>
      <cause id="cause-required-rule">
        <title>Cause: A Required rule failed</title>
        <p>One or more Required validation rules failed on at least one file
        in your pull request.</p>
      </cause>
      <remedy id="remedy-required-rule">
        <title>Resolution</title>
        <steps>
          <step>
            <cmd>Open the CI pipeline log to find the rule failure details.</cmd>
            <info>
              <p>In GitHub Actions: navigate to the <b>Actions</b> tab of the
              repository, select the failing workflow run, expand the
              <b>Validate documentation</b> step, and read the output.</p>
              <p>Alternatively, if reports were uploaded as artifacts, download
              the <b>validation-reports</b> artifact and open the JSON file for
              your changed article.</p>
            </info>
          </step>
          <step>
            <cmd>Note the rule name and mitigation message for each failure.</cmd>
          </step>
          <step>
            <cmd>Reproduce the failure locally.</cmd>
            <info>
              <codeblock xml:space="preserve">md-validate validate docs/your-article.md --rules rules/tutorial.json</codeblock>
              <p>Confirm you see the same failure. If local validation passes
              but CI fails, check that your local rule set and the one in CI
              are the same version.</p>
            </info>
          </step>
          <step>
            <cmd>Fix the identified failures using the mitigation messages
            as your guide.</cmd>
            <info>
              <p>For guidance on common failure types, see
              <xref href="../user-guide/tasks/t_read-validation-report.dita">Read the validation report</xref>.</p>
            </info>
          </step>
          <step>
            <cmd>Push the fix and verify the CI check passes.</cmd>
          </step>
        </steps>
      </remedy>
    </troubleSolution>

    <troubleSolution>
      <cause id="cause-nltk-ci">
        <title>Cause: NLTK data is missing from the CI environment</title>
        <p>The pipeline does not include a step to download NLTK corpora, or
        the NLTK cache step failed.</p>
      </cause>
      <remedy id="remedy-nltk-ci">
        <title>Resolution</title>
        <steps>
          <step>
            <cmd>Open your workflow file
            (<filepath>.github/workflows/validate-docs.yml</filepath>) and
            add the NLTK download step before the validation step.</cmd>
            <info>
              <codeblock xml:space="preserve">- name: Download NLTK language data
  run: python -m nltk.downloader punkt_tab averaged_perceptron_tagger_eng</codeblock>
            </info>
          </step>
          <step>
            <cmd>Commit the updated workflow file and push.</cmd>
            <stepresult>The CI pipeline downloads the NLTK corpora before
            validation runs. For a complete workflow example including the
            NLTK cache step, see
            <xref href="../user-guide/tasks/t_integrate-github-actions.dita">Add markdown-validator to a GitHub Actions workflow</xref>.</stepresult>
          </step>
        </steps>
      </remedy>
    </troubleSolution>

    <troubleSolution>
      <cause id="cause-wrong-rules">
        <title>Cause: CI uses a different rule set than local validation</title>
        <p>CI validates with the rule set file committed to the repository.
        If you are running a different version of the rule set locally, the
        results will differ.</p>
      </cause>
      <remedy id="remedy-wrong-rules">
        <title>Resolution</title>
        <steps>
          <step>
            <cmd>Check the CI configuration file to see which rule set
            it uses.</cmd>
            <info>
              <p>Open <filepath>.github/workflows/validate-docs.yml</filepath>
              and look for the <codeph>--rules</codeph> flag in the validate
              step.</p>
            </info>
          </step>
          <step>
            <cmd>Run local validation with the same rule set path.</cmd>
            <info>
              <codeblock xml:space="preserve">md-validate validate docs/your-article.md --rules rules/tutorial.json</codeblock>
            </info>
          </step>
        </steps>
      </remedy>
    </troubleSolution>

  </troublebody>
</troubleshooting>
