<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE troubleshooting PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Troubleshooting//EN" "troubleshooting.dtd">
<!--
  SEO keyword phrase: markdown-validator ParseError no front matter fix
  Audience: user
-->
<troubleshooting id="ts_no-frontmatter">
  <title>Resolve a ParseError caused by missing front matter</title>

  <shortdesc>A <systemoutput>ParseError</systemoutput> means markdown-validator
  could not find a valid YAML front-matter block at the top of your file.
  Every Markdown file must begin with <codeph>---</codeph> to be
  validated.</shortdesc>

  <prolog>
    <metadata>
      <keywords>
        <keyword>ParseError</keyword>
        <keyword>no front matter</keyword>
        <keyword>YAML front matter required</keyword>
        <keyword>--- delimiter missing</keyword>
      </keywords>
      <othermeta name="description"
        content="Fix the ParseError that occurs when a Markdown file does not begin with a valid YAML front-matter block delimited by ---."/>
    </metadata>
  </prolog>

  <troublebody>

    <condition id="condition">
      <title>Situation</title>
      <p>You run validation and see an error similar to:</p>
      <codeblock xml:space="preserve">ParseError: docs/article.md — no front matter found.
  File must begin with a --- delimited YAML block.</codeblock>
      <p>The file is not validated and counts as a failure in the report.</p>
    </condition>

    <troubleSolution>
      <cause id="cause-missing">
        <title>Cause: Front matter block is absent</title>
        <p>The file does not start with <codeph>---</codeph>, or the opening
        delimiter is preceded by whitespace or a blank line.</p>
      </cause>
      <remedy id="remedy-missing">
        <title>Resolution</title>
        <steps>
          <step>
            <cmd>Ensure the very first line is exactly <codeph>---</codeph>
            with no preceding whitespace, and close the block with a second
            <codeph>---</codeph> line.</cmd>
            <info>
              <codeblock xml:space="preserve">---
title: "Deploy a web application"
ms.topic: tutorial
ms.date: 2026-03-20
author: your-github-username
description: "Step-by-step guide to deploying a web app."
---

# Tutorial: Deploy a web application
...</codeblock>
            </info>
          </step>
        </steps>
      </remedy>
    </troubleSolution>

    <troubleSolution>
      <cause id="cause-encoding">
        <title>Cause: File encoding issue</title>
        <p>The file contains a byte-order mark (BOM) or non-UTF-8 characters
        before the <codeph>---</codeph> delimiter.</p>
      </cause>
      <remedy id="remedy-encoding">
        <title>Resolution</title>
        <steps-informal>
          <p>Save the file as UTF-8 without BOM. In most text editors, this is
          the default encoding. If you are using VS Code, check the encoding
          indicator in the status bar at the bottom right — it should show
          <uicontrol>UTF-8</uicontrol>.</p>
        </steps-informal>
      </remedy>
    </troubleSolution>

  </troublebody>
</troubleshooting>
