<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE troubleshooting PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Troubleshooting//EN" "troubleshooting.dtd">
<!--
  SEO keyword phrase: markdown-validator NLTK LookupError punkt_tab fix
  Audience: user, rule-creator
-->
<troubleshooting id="ts_nltk-error">
  <title>Resolve a NLTK LookupError on first run</title>

  <shortdesc>A <systemoutput>LookupError: Resource punkt_tab not found</systemoutput>
  error means the NLTK language data required by sentence-count or part-of-speech
  rules is not installed on your system.</shortdesc>

  <prolog>
    <metadata>
      <keywords>
        <keyword>NLTK LookupError</keyword>
        <keyword>punkt_tab not found</keyword>
        <keyword>sentence rule error</keyword>
        <keyword>NLTK download fix</keyword>
      </keywords>
      <othermeta name="description"
        content="Fix the NLTK LookupError that occurs when running sentence-count or part-of-speech validation rules without the required NLTK language data."/>
    </metadata>
  </prolog>

  <troublebody>

    <condition id="condition">
      <title>Situation</title>
      <p>You run <codeph>md-validate validate</codeph> and see an error similar
      to:</p>
      <codeblock xml:space="preserve">LookupError: Resource punkt_tab not found.
Please use the NLTK Downloader to obtain the resource:
  &gt;&gt;&gt; import nltk; nltk.download('punkt_tab')</codeblock>
      <p>This error occurs when a rule uses the <codeph>s</codeph> (sentence
      count) or <codeph>p&lt;N&gt;</codeph> (part of speech) operators and the
      required NLTK corpora are not installed.</p>
    </condition>

    <troubleSolution>
      <cause id="cause">
        <title>Cause</title>
        <p>The NLTK language data files (<codeph>punkt_tab</codeph> and
        <codeph>averaged_perceptron_tagger_eng</codeph>) are not included in
        the markdown-validator pip package. They must be downloaded once per
        Python environment before sentence or POS rules can run.</p>
      </cause>
      <remedy id="remedy">
        <title>Resolution</title>
        <steps>
          <step>
            <cmd>Activate the virtual environment where markdown-validator is
            installed.</cmd>
            <info>
              <codeblock xml:space="preserve">source .venv/bin/activate       # macOS/Linux
.venv\Scripts\Activate.ps1      # Windows PowerShell</codeblock>
            </info>
          </step>
          <step>
            <cmd>Download the required NLTK corpora.</cmd>
            <info>
              <codeblock xml:space="preserve">python -m nltk.downloader punkt_tab averaged_perceptron_tagger_eng</codeblock>
            </info>
            <stepresult>NLTK downloads the files to your NLTK data directory
            (<filepath>~/nltk_data</filepath> on macOS/Linux).</stepresult>
          </step>
          <step>
            <cmd>Re-run the validation.</cmd>
            <info>
              <codeblock xml:space="preserve">md-validate validate docs/article.md --rules rules/tutorial.json</codeblock>
            </info>
            <stepresult>The LookupError no longer appears.</stepresult>
          </step>
        </steps>
      </remedy>
    </troubleSolution>

    <troubleSolution>
      <cause id="cause-ci">
        <title>Cause (CI environment)</title>
        <p>The CI pipeline does not include an NLTK download step.</p>
      </cause>
      <remedy id="remedy-ci">
        <title>Resolution (CI environment)</title>
        <steps-informal>
          <p>Add the NLTK download step to your CI workflow before the validation
          step. See <xref href="../user-guide/tasks/t_integrate-github-actions.dita">Add markdown-validator to a GitHub Actions workflow</xref>
          for a complete example that includes this step.</p>
        </steps-informal>
      </remedy>
    </troubleSolution>

  </troublebody>
</troubleshooting>
