<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE troubleshooting PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Troubleshooting//EN" "troubleshooting.dtd">
<!--
  SEO keyword phrase: markdown-validator rule always fails valid document debug
  Audience: rule-creator
-->
<troubleshooting id="ts_rule-never-passes">
  <title>Debug a rule that never passes on a valid document</title>

  <shortdesc>A rule that always fails even on correctly formatted documents
  usually has a mismatch between the query result and the expected value.
  Use the REPL to inspect the exact values the rule is working with.</shortdesc>

  <prolog>
    <metadata>
      <keywords>
        <keyword>rule always fails</keyword>
        <keyword>rule debug</keyword>
        <keyword>rule never passes</keyword>
        <keyword>incorrect rule result</keyword>
      </keywords>
      <othermeta name="description"
        content="Debug a markdown-validator rule that fails on every document even when the document satisfies the rule's intent. Common causes: whitespace, wrong operator, multi-element XPath, wrong flag."/>
    </metadata>
  </prolog>

  <troublebody>

    <condition id="condition">
      <title>Situation</title>
      <p>You have a rule that you believe should pass on a correctly formatted
      document, but it always reports FAIL regardless of the document
      content.</p>
    </condition>

    <troubleSolution>
      <cause id="cause-whitespace">
        <title>Cause: Whitespace in the query result</title>
        <p>The metadata value or XPath text result has leading or trailing
        whitespace that prevents an equality match.</p>
      </cause>
      <remedy id="remedy-whitespace">
        <title>Resolution</title>
        <steps>
          <step>
            <cmd>Start the REPL, load the document, and inspect the exact
            value.</cmd>
            <info>
              <codeblock xml:space="preserve">md-validate repl
&gt; load docs/article.md
&gt; get ms.topic</codeblock>
            </info>
            <stepresult>Compare the output to what your rule's
            <codeph>value</codeph> field expects. Look for extra spaces or
            quotes.</stepresult>
          </step>
          <step>
            <cmd>Update the rule's <codeph>value</codeph> field to match the
            exact string, or clean up the front matter.</cmd>
          </step>
        </steps>
      </remedy>
    </troubleSolution>

    <troubleSolution>
      <cause id="cause-multi-element">
        <title>Cause: Multi-element XPath result with equality operator</title>
        <p>An XPath expression returns multiple elements, and the
        <codeph>==</codeph> operator requires <i>every</i> element to match
        the expected value. If any element differs, the rule fails. This
        is almost never the intended behavior.</p>
      </cause>
      <remedy id="remedy-multi-element">
        <title>Resolution</title>
        <steps>
          <step>
            <cmd>In the REPL, run the query with the <codeph>text</codeph>
            flag to see all results.</cmd>
            <info>
              <codeblock xml:space="preserve">&gt; query //h2 text
Result: ['Prerequisites', 'Deploy the app', 'Clean up resources']</codeblock>
            </info>
          </step>
          <step>
            <cmd>Narrow the XPath to target the specific element you want
            by position.</cmd>
            <info>
              <codeblock xml:space="preserve"># Instead of: //h2[last()]/preceding-sibling::h2
# Use:
&gt; query //h2[last()-1] text
Result: ['Deploy the app']</codeblock>
            </info>
          </step>
        </steps>
      </remedy>
    </troubleSolution>

    <troubleSolution>
      <cause id="cause-wrong-flag">
        <title>Cause: Wrong flag for the check type</title>
        <p>Using <codeph>text</codeph> when you need <codeph>count</codeph>,
        or vice versa, causes the comparison to fail because the result is
        not in the expected form.</p>
      </cause>
      <remedy id="remedy-wrong-flag">
        <title>Resolution</title>
        <steps>
          <step>
            <cmd>Review the flags reference to confirm you are using the
            correct flag for your check.</cmd>
            <info>
              <p>The <xref href="../rule-creator-guide/reference/r_flags.dita">flags reference</xref>
              lists all flags with descriptions and examples.</p>
            </info>
          </step>
          <step>
            <cmd>In the REPL, compare the output of different flags on the
            same XPath to see which form matches your expected value.</cmd>
            <info>
              <codeblock xml:space="preserve">&gt; query /html/body/h1 count
Result: 1

&gt; query /html/body/h1 text
Result: ['How to deploy the app']</codeblock>
              <p>Use <codeph>count</codeph> when comparing to a number, and
              <codeph>text</codeph> when comparing to a string.</p>
            </info>
          </step>
        </steps>
      </remedy>
    </troubleSolution>

    <troubleSolution>
      <cause id="cause-inverted-workflow">
        <title>Cause: Inverted workflow branch logic</title>
        <p>A workflow intended to express absence uses a branch pattern that
        is inverted — it passes when the content is wrong and fails when the
        content is correct.</p>
      </cause>
      <remedy id="remedy-inverted-workflow">
        <title>Resolution</title>
        <steps>
          <step>
            <cmd>Run validation with <codeph>--verbose</codeph> to trace the
            workflow step-by-step.</cmd>
            <info>
              <codeblock xml:space="preserve">md-validate --verbose validate docs/article.md --rules rules/tutorial.json</codeblock>
              <p>The verbose output shows which branch (True or False) the
              decision node follows for each workflow step.</p>
            </info>
          </step>
          <step>
            <cmd>Read the decision point output carefully and verify your
            branch routing.</cmd>
            <info>
              <p>The True branch runs when the precondition rule
              <i>passes</i>. If your workflow uses <codeph>F-sentinel</codeph>
              for the False branch, confirm the sentinel rule passes on valid
              documents by testing it in the REPL with <codeph>eval</codeph>.</p>
              <p><xref href="../rule-creator-guide/concepts/c_rule-design-patterns.dita">Rule design patterns</xref>
              covers the absence-check pattern and the known fragility of
              workflow inversion.</p>
            </info>
          </step>
        </steps>
      </remedy>
    </troubleSolution>

  </troublebody>
</troubleshooting>
