<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE troubleshooting PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Troubleshooting//EN" "troubleshooting.dtd">
<!--
  SEO keyword phrase: XPath wrong results markdown-validator flat DOM debug
  Audience: rule-creator
-->
<troubleshooting id="ts_xpath-wrong-results">
  <title>Debug an XPath expression that returns unexpected results</title>

  <shortdesc>XPath queries that seem correct but return unexpected results are
  usually caused by the flat HTML structure that markdown-validator produces.
  Use the REPL to inspect the actual HTML and adjust your query.</shortdesc>

  <prolog>
    <metadata>
      <keywords>
        <keyword>XPath wrong results</keyword>
        <keyword>flat DOM XPath</keyword>
        <keyword>XPath debug REPL</keyword>
        <keyword>following-sibling XPath problem</keyword>
      </keywords>
      <othermeta name="description"
        content="Debug unexpected XPath query results in markdown-validator, including flat DOM limitations, namespace issues, and following-sibling behavior."/>
    </metadata>
  </prolog>

  <troublebody>

    <condition id="condition">
      <title>Situation</title>
      <p>An XPath expression in a body rule returns no results, or it returns
      more elements than expected, causing the rule to behave incorrectly.</p>
    </condition>

    <troubleSolution>
      <cause id="cause-flat-dom">
        <title>Cause: Flat HTML — within-section containment does not work</title>
        <p>The rendered HTML is flat: all headings are direct children of
        <codeph>&lt;body&gt;</codeph>. Queries like
        <codeph>.//h2[1]/following-sibling::p</codeph> do not return only
        paragraphs in the first H2's section — they return all paragraphs
        after the first H2, including those in every subsequent section.</p>
      </cause>
      <remedy id="remedy-flat-dom">
        <title>Resolution</title>
        <steps>
          <step>
            <cmd>In the REPL, run <codeph>dump html</codeph> on your document
            to see the actual HTML structure.</cmd>
            <info>
              <codeblock xml:space="preserve">md-validate repl
&gt; load docs/tutorial.md
&gt; dump html</codeblock>
              <p>Confirm that headings are direct children of
              <codeph>&lt;body&gt;</codeph> with no section wrappers.</p>
            </info>
          </step>
          <step>
            <cmd>Rewrite the XPath to use absolute position instead of
            containment.</cmd>
            <info>
              <p>Instead of:</p>
              <codeblock xml:space="preserve">.//h2[@id='prerequisites']/following-sibling::p[1]</codeblock>
              <p>Use:</p>
              <codeblock xml:space="preserve">//h2[normalize-space(text())='Prerequisites']</codeblock>
              <p>Checking for the presence of the heading rather than its
              content achieves the same editorial goal without requiring
              containment.</p>
            </info>
          </step>
        </steps>
      </remedy>
    </troubleSolution>

    <troubleSolution>
      <cause id="cause-text-spaces">
        <title>Cause: Whitespace in element text</title>
        <p>XPath text comparisons are exact. A heading with a trailing space
        (<codeph>Prerequisites </codeph>) does not match the predicate
        <codeph>[text()='Prerequisites']</codeph>.</p>
      </cause>
      <remedy id="remedy-text-spaces">
        <title>Resolution</title>
        <steps>
          <step>
            <cmd>In the REPL, run the query with <codeph>text</codeph> to
            see the exact string the element contains, including any whitespace.</cmd>
            <info>
              <codeblock xml:space="preserve">&gt; query //h2 text
Result: ['Prerequisites ', 'Deploy the app']</codeblock>
              <p>Note any trailing spaces in the output.</p>
            </info>
          </step>
          <step>
            <cmd>Update the XPath predicate to use
            <codeph>normalize-space()</codeph> instead of a bare
            <codeph>text()</codeph> comparison.</cmd>
            <info>
              <codeblock xml:space="preserve">//h2[normalize-space(text())='Prerequisites']</codeblock>
            </info>
          </step>
        </steps>
      </remedy>
    </troubleSolution>

    <troubleSolution>
      <cause id="cause-no-matches">
        <title>Cause: XPath returns zero results</title>
        <p>The element path does not match any nodes in the HTML. Common reasons:
        the element name is wrong, the document uses a heading level you did not
        expect, or the XPath predicate is too strict.</p>
      </cause>
      <remedy id="remedy-no-matches">
        <title>Resolution</title>
        <steps>
          <step>
            <cmd>In the REPL, run a broader query first and narrow it down.</cmd>
            <info>
              <codeblock xml:space="preserve">&gt; query //h2 text
Result: ['Prerequisites', 'Deploy the app', 'Clean up resources']

&gt; query //h2[2] text
Result: ['Deploy the app']</codeblock>
            </info>
          </step>
          <step>
            <cmd>Compare the actual element text against your predicate
            value.</cmd>
          </step>
        </steps>
      </remedy>
    </troubleSolution>

  </troublebody>
</troubleshooting>
