<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE task PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Task//EN" "task.dtd">
<!--
  SEO keyword phrase: create markdown-validator rule set JSON file
  Audience: rule-creator
-->
<task id="t_create-rule-set">
  <title>Create a rule set file</title>

  <shortdesc>Create a new JSON rule set file that markdown-validator can use to
  validate your documentation. Start with a minimal structure and add rules
  incrementally.</shortdesc>

  <prolog>
    <metadata>
      <keywords>
        <keyword>create rule set</keyword>
        <keyword>rule set JSON</keyword>
        <keyword>documentation standards file</keyword>
      </keywords>
      <othermeta name="description"
        content="Create a new markdown-validator rule set JSON file with the correct structure for header rules, body rules, and workflows."/>
    </metadata>
  </prolog>

  <taskbody>

    <prereq id="prereq">
      <p>markdown-validator is installed. See
      <xref href="../../user-guide/tasks/t_install.dita">Install markdown-validator</xref>.
      Review the rule set structure before creating your file:
      <xref href="../concepts/c_rule-sets-overview.dita">Understanding rule sets</xref>.</p>
    </prereq>

    <context id="context">
      <p>A rule set file is a plain JSON file. Create it in the
      <filepath>rules/</filepath> directory of your documentation repository so
      that it is version-controlled alongside the content it governs.</p>
    </context>

    <steps>

      <step id="step-create-file">
        <cmd>Create a new file named after the content type it governs.</cmd>
        <info>
          <p>Use a descriptive name that reflects the content type, for
          example <filepath>rules/tutorial.json</filepath> or
          <filepath>rules/reference.json</filepath>.</p>
        </info>
      </step>

      <step id="step-add-structure">
        <cmd>Add the top-level JSON structure.</cmd>
        <info>
          <codeblock xml:space="preserve">{
  "rules": {
    "header": [],
    "body":   []
  },
  "workflows": []
}</codeblock>
          <p>This is a valid, empty rule set. No rules means no checks — all
          files will pass until you add rules.</p>
        </info>
      </step>

      <step id="step-add-first-rule">
        <cmd>Add your first header rule to check a required front-matter
        field.</cmd>
        <info>
          <codeblock xml:space="preserve">{
  "rules": {
    "header": [
      {
        "id": 1,
        "name": "ms-topic-must-exist",
        "type": "header",
        "query": "ms.topic",
        "flag": "check",
        "operation": "==",
        "value": "true",
        "level": "Required",
        "mitigation": "Add ms.topic to the front matter."
      }
    ],
    "body": []
  },
  "workflows": []
}</codeblock>
        </info>
      </step>

      <step id="step-validate-structure">
        <cmd>Test the rule set by running it against a sample document.</cmd>
        <info>
          <codeblock xml:space="preserve">md-validate validate sample.md --rules rules/tutorial.json</codeblock>
          <p>If the JSON is malformed, the tool reports a schema error.
          Fix the JSON and re-run.</p>
        </info>
        <stepresult>The validation report confirms the rule set loads and
        evaluates correctly.</stepresult>
      </step>

    </steps>

    <postreq id="postreq">
      <ul>
        <li>To add header rules, see
        <xref href="t_write-header-rule.dita">Write a header rule</xref>.</li>
        <li>To add body rules, see
        <xref href="t_write-body-rule.dita">Write a body rule</xref>.</li>
      </ul>
    </postreq>

  </taskbody>
</task>
