<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE task PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Task//EN" "task.dtd">
<!--
  SEO keyword phrase: deploy markdown-validator rule set version control CI
  Audience: rule-creator
-->
<task id="t_deploy-rule-set">
  <title>Deploy and version a rule set</title>

  <shortdesc>Deploying a rule set means committing it to your documentation
  repository, verifying it does not create unexpected failures across existing
  content, and communicating any new requirements to your authors.</shortdesc>

  <prolog>
    <metadata>
      <keywords>
        <keyword>deploy rule set</keyword>
        <keyword>version rule set</keyword>
        <keyword>commit rule set</keyword>
        <keyword>communicate rule changes</keyword>
      </keywords>
      <othermeta name="description"
        content="Deploy a new or updated markdown-validator rule set by committing it to version control, running a compliance report, and communicating changes to your authors."/>
    </metadata>
  </prolog>

  <taskbody>

    <prereq id="prereq">
      <p>All new rules are tested. See <xref href="t_test-rule-repl.dita">Test a rule in the REPL</xref>
      and <xref href="t_test-workflow-repl.dita">Test a workflow in the REPL</xref>. Review governance principles
      before deploying: <xref href="../concepts/c_rule-governance.dita">Rule set governance and versioning</xref>.</p>
    </prereq>

    <steps>

      <step id="step-scan-repo">
        <cmd>Run the rule set across the entire documentation repository and
        save the results.</cmd>
        <info>
          <codeblock xml:space="preserve">md-validate validate docs/ --rules rules/tutorial.json \
  --format csv --output reports/pre-deploy-scan/</codeblock>
          <p>Review the CSV reports to understand the blast radius of the new
          rules. How many articles fail? Which authors are affected?</p>
        </info>
      </step>

      <step id="step-adjust-level">
        <cmd>If the number of failures is large, change new Required rules to
        Suggested before deploying.</cmd>
        <info>
          <p>Deploying a Required rule that fails for 200 articles creates
          immediate pipeline failures for all authors. Start as Suggested,
          give authors time to comply, then promote to Required. See
          <xref href="../concepts/c_rule-governance.dita">Rule set governance and versioning</xref>.</p>
        </info>
      </step>

      <step id="step-update-changelog">
        <cmd>Update the rule set changelog.</cmd>
        <info>
          <p>Document each change in <filepath>rules/CHANGELOG.md</filepath>:</p>
          <codeblock xml:space="preserve">## 2026-03-20

### Added
- Rule 12: `description-under-160-chars` (Suggested) — description field
  must be under 160 characters for SEO.

### Changed
- Rule 3: `ms-date-must-be-fresh` promoted from Suggested to Required.
  Authors had 60 days to update stale dates.</codeblock>
        </info>
      </step>

      <step id="step-notify-authors">
        <cmd>Notify your author team of the changes before committing.</cmd>
        <info>
          <p>Share the following information:</p>
          <ul>
            <li>Which rules are new (with their mitigation messages)</li>
            <li>Which Suggested rules are being promoted to Required, and
            when</li>
            <li>The date the change takes effect</li>
            <li>How to run the validation locally to check their articles</li>
          </ul>
        </info>
      </step>

      <step id="step-commit">
        <cmd>Commit the updated rule set and changelog.</cmd>
        <info>
          <codeblock xml:space="preserve">git add rules/tutorial.json rules/CHANGELOG.md
git commit -m "rules: add description length check (Suggested)"
git push</codeblock>
        </info>
        <stepresult>The CI pipeline uses the new rule set on all subsequent
        pull requests.</stepresult>
      </step>

    </steps>

  </taskbody>
</task>
