<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE task PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Task//EN" "task.dtd">
<!--
  SEO keyword phrase: start markdown-validator interactive REPL rule development
  Audience: rule-creator
-->
<task id="t_start-repl">
  <title>Start the interactive REPL</title>

  <shortdesc>The interactive REPL lets you load a Markdown document and explore
  its structure, test XPath queries, and evaluate rules interactively. Use it
  when writing new rules to confirm your queries return what you expect before
  adding them to a rule set.</shortdesc>

  <prolog>
    <metadata>
      <keywords>
        <keyword>start REPL</keyword>
        <keyword>interactive rule testing</keyword>
        <keyword>md-validate repl</keyword>
        <keyword>rule development tool</keyword>
      </keywords>
      <othermeta name="description"
        content="Start the markdown-validator interactive REPL to explore document structure, test XPath expressions, and evaluate rules before adding them to a rule set."/>
    </metadata>
  </prolog>

  <taskbody>

    <prereq id="prereq">
      <p>markdown-validator is installed and the virtual environment is active.
      See <xref href="../../user-guide/tasks/t_install.dita">Install markdown-validator</xref>.</p>
    </prereq>

    <context id="context">
      <p>The REPL is a scratch pad for rule authors — try queries and rules
      against real documents without modifying the rule set file. Use
      <codeph>md-validate validate</codeph> for production validation.</p>
    </context>

    <steps>

      <step id="step-start">
        <cmd>Start the REPL.</cmd>
        <info>
          <codeblock xml:space="preserve">md-validate repl</codeblock>
        </info>
        <stepresult>The terminal shows a welcome message and the
        <systemoutput>&gt;</systemoutput> prompt:
        <codeblock xml:space="preserve">Markdown Validator REPL
Type 'help' for a list of commands, 'quit' to exit.
&gt;</codeblock>
        </stepresult>
      </step>

      <step id="step-load">
        <cmd>Load a Markdown document to work with.</cmd>
        <info>
          <codeblock xml:space="preserve">&gt; load docs/tutorial-deploy-app.md</codeblock>
        </info>
        <stepresult>The REPL confirms the file is loaded and shows the
        front-matter keys:
        <codeblock xml:space="preserve">Loaded: /abs/path/docs/tutorial-deploy-app.md
  Metadata keys: ['title', 'ms.topic', 'ms.date', 'author', 'description']</codeblock>
        </stepresult>
      </step>

      <step id="step-explore" importance="optional">
        <cmd>Inspect the document's metadata and HTML structure before
        testing rules.</cmd>
        <info>
          <codeblock xml:space="preserve">&gt; dump metadata
&gt; dump html</codeblock>
          <p><codeph>dump metadata</codeph> prints the YAML front matter as a
          JSON object. <codeph>dump html</codeph> prints the rendered HTML body,
          which shows the exact structure your XPath queries will run against.</p>
        </info>
      </step>

    </steps>

    <result id="result">
      <p>The REPL is running with a document loaded. To test rules, see
      <xref href="t_test-rule-repl.dita">Test a rule in the interactive REPL</xref>.</p>
    </result>

    <postreq id="postreq">
      <p>To exit the REPL, enter <userinput>quit</userinput> or press
      <uicontrol>Ctrl+D</uicontrol>.</p>
    </postreq>

  </taskbody>
</task>
