<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE task PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Task//EN" "task.dtd">
<!--
  SEO keyword phrase: test workflow REPL markdown-validator conditional rule
  Audience: rule-creator
-->
<task id="t_test-workflow-repl">
  <title>Test a workflow in the interactive REPL</title>

  <shortdesc>Testing a workflow requires validating that both the True and False
  branches execute correctly. Use the full <codeph>md-validate validate</codeph>
  command with representative documents rather than the REPL
  <codeph>eval</codeph> command, because <codeph>eval</codeph> tests only a
  single rule.</shortdesc>

  <prolog>
    <metadata>
      <keywords>
        <keyword>test workflow REPL</keyword>
        <keyword>validate workflow</keyword>
        <keyword>conditional rule testing</keyword>
      </keywords>
      <othermeta name="description"
        content="Verify that a markdown-validator workflow evaluates correctly by testing both branches against representative documents in the REPL."/>
    </metadata>
  </prolog>

  <taskbody>

    <prereq id="prereq">
      <p>Your workflow is written in the rule set file and you have at least two
      test documents: one that exercises the True branch and one that exercises
      the False branch.</p>
    </prereq>

    <steps>

      <step id="step-test-true-branch">
        <cmd>Run validation on a document that should exercise the True branch
        of the workflow.</cmd>
        <info>
          <codeblock xml:space="preserve">md-validate --verbose validate docs/tutorial-article.md --rules rules/tutorial.json</codeblock>
          <p>With <codeph>--verbose</codeph>, the output shows each rule
          evaluated and its result, including workflow steps.</p>
        </info>
        <stepresult>Confirm the workflow report shows the expected True-branch
        result for this document.</stepresult>
      </step>

      <step id="step-test-false-branch">
        <cmd>Run validation on a document that exercises the False branch.</cmd>
        <info>
          <codeblock xml:space="preserve">md-validate --verbose validate docs/how-to-article.md --rules rules/tutorial.json</codeblock>
        </info>
        <stepresult>Confirm the workflow passes or fails as intended for this
        document type.</stepresult>
      </step>

      <step id="step-check-repl" importance="optional">
        <cmd>Use the REPL to inspect the metadata and structure of a document
        that produces unexpected results.</cmd>
        <info>
          <codeblock xml:space="preserve">md-validate repl
&gt; load docs/unexpected-result-doc.md
&gt; get ms.topic
&gt; query //h2 text</codeblock>
          <p>Compare the actual metadata and structure against what your
          workflow rules expect. Common causes of unexpected results:</p>
          <ul>
            <li>The precondition rule (the decision rule) matches more or fewer
            documents than you expected.</li>
            <li>A sentinel rule (used in the False branch) is failing instead
            of always passing.</li>
            <li>Whitespace in a metadata value causes an equality check to
            fail.</li>
          </ul>
        </info>
      </step>

    </steps>

  </taskbody>
</task>
