<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE task PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Task//EN" "task.dtd">
<!--
  SEO keyword phrase: test rule REPL markdown-validator XPath query eval
  Audience: rule-creator
-->
<task id="t_test-rule-repl">
  <title>Test a rule in the interactive REPL</title>

  <shortdesc>Test a rule in the REPL by running the XPath query against a loaded
  document and then evaluating the full rule object. This confirms your rule
  will behave as expected before you commit it.</shortdesc>

  <prolog>
    <metadata>
      <keywords>
        <keyword>test rule REPL</keyword>
        <keyword>eval rule</keyword>
        <keyword>XPath query REPL</keyword>
        <keyword>validate rule before adding</keyword>
      </keywords>
      <othermeta name="description"
        content="Use the markdown-validator REPL to test XPath expressions and evaluate rule JSON against a loaded document before adding the rule to a rule set."/>
    </metadata>
  </prolog>

  <taskbody>

    <prereq id="prereq">
      <p>The REPL is running and a document is loaded. See
      <xref href="t_start-repl.dita">Start the interactive REPL</xref>.</p>
    </prereq>

    <steps>

      <step id="step-query-xpath">
        <cmd>Test your XPath expression with the <codeph>query</codeph>
        command.</cmd>
        <info>
          <p>Syntax: <codeph>query &lt;xpath&gt; &lt;flag&gt;</codeph></p>
          <codeblock xml:space="preserve">&gt; query /html/body/h1 text
Result: ['My Tutorial Title']

&gt; query //h2 count
Result: [3]

&gt; query //h2 text
Result: ['Prerequisites', 'Deploy the app', 'Clean up resources']</codeblock>
          <p>Supported flags for <codeph>query</codeph>: <codeph>text</codeph>,
          <codeph>count</codeph>, <codeph>dom</codeph>.</p>
        </info>
        <stepresult>Confirm the result matches what you expect. If it does not,
        adjust the XPath and query again.</stepresult>
      </step>

      <step id="step-eval-rule">
        <cmd>Evaluate the full rule JSON object with the <codeph>eval</codeph>
        command.</cmd>
        <info>
          <p>Pass the rule as a single-line JSON object:</p>
          <codeblock xml:space="preserve">&gt; eval {"id":5,"name":"must-have-prerequisites","type":"body","query":"//h2[normalize-space(text())='Prerequisites']","flag":"count","operation":">","value":"0","mitigation":"Add a Prerequisites section."}</codeblock>
        </info>
        <stepresult>The REPL prints PASS or FAIL with the rule name:
        <codeblock xml:space="preserve">PASS: rule id=5 name='must-have-prerequisites'</codeblock>
        or:
        <codeblock xml:space="preserve">FAIL: rule id=5 name='must-have-prerequisites'
  → Add a Prerequisites section.</codeblock>
        </stepresult>
      </step>

      <step id="step-test-negative">
        <cmd>Load a document that should fail the rule and confirm it does.</cmd>
        <info>
          <codeblock xml:space="preserve">&gt; load docs/article-without-prereqs.md
&gt; eval {"id":5, ...same rule JSON...}</codeblock>
        </info>
        <stepresult>The REPL shows FAIL with your mitigation message, confirming
        the rule catches the intended problem.</stepresult>
      </step>

    </steps>

  </taskbody>
</task>
