<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE task PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Task//EN" "task.dtd">
<!--
  SEO keyword phrase: write markdown-validator workflow conditional rule chain
  Audience: rule-creator
-->
<task id="t_write-workflow">
  <title>Write a workflow for conditional rule chains</title>

  <shortdesc>A workflow chains rules together so that some checks only run when
  others pass or fail. Write a workflow when your editorial requirement is
  conditional — it only applies in specific circumstances.</shortdesc>

  <prolog>
    <metadata>
      <keywords>
        <keyword>write workflow</keyword>
        <keyword>conditional rule chain</keyword>
        <keyword>workflow steps</keyword>
        <keyword>rule dependency</keyword>
      </keywords>
      <othermeta name="description"
        content="Write a markdown-validator workflow to chain rules with conditional logic, so checks only run when their preconditions are met."/>
    </metadata>
  </prolog>

  <taskbody>

    <prereq id="prereq">
      <ul>
        <li>You have defined the individual rules the workflow will reference
        in your rule set file.</li>
        <li>Review the workflow concept: <xref href="../concepts/c_workflow-language-overview.dita">Workflow language overview</xref>.</li>
        <li>Review the step-pattern reference: <xref href="../reference/r_workflow-steps.dita">Workflow step reference</xref>.</li>
      </ul>
    </prereq>

    <context id="context">
      <p>Before writing the workflow, clarify the conditional logic in plain
      English. For example: "If <codeph>ms.topic</codeph> is 'tutorial'
      (rule 1 passes), then also check that the H1 starts with 'Tutorial:'
      (rule 2). If it is not 'tutorial' (rule 1 fails), pass without
      checking rule 2."</p>
    </context>

    <steps>

      <step id="step-map-to-steps">
        <cmd>Map the plain-English logic to the step token sequence.</cmd>
        <info>
          <p>For a simple conditional check (check rule B only when rule A
          passes):</p>
          <codeblock xml:space="preserve">S-A, A-D, T-B, F-sentinel, B-M, sentinel-M, M-E</codeblock>
          <p>Where <codeph>sentinel</codeph> is the ID of a rule that always
          passes for valid documents (typically rule 1 in your rule set).</p>

          <p>Example: check H1 format only when <codeph>ms.topic == tutorial</codeph>
          (rule 1) passes:</p>
          <codeblock xml:space="preserve">"steps": "S-1,1-D,T-6,F-1,6-M,1-M,M-E"</codeblock>
        </info>
      </step>

      <step id="step-add-workflow">
        <cmd>Add the workflow object to the <codeph>workflows</codeph> array
        in your rule set file.</cmd>
        <info>
          <codeblock xml:space="preserve">{
  "name": "h1-format-for-tutorials",
  "steps": "S-1,1-D,T-6,F-1,6-M,1-M,M-E",
  "level": "Required",
  "fix": "For tutorial articles, H1 must start with 'Tutorial:'"
}</codeblock>
        </info>
      </step>

      <step id="step-test-workflow">
        <cmd>Test the workflow against documents that cover both branches.</cmd>
        <info>
          <codeblock xml:space="preserve"># Document where ms.topic = tutorial (should evaluate rule 6)
md-validate validate tutorial-article.md --rules rules/tutorial.json

# Document where ms.topic != tutorial (should skip rule 6)
md-validate validate how-to-article.md --rules rules/tutorial.json</codeblock>
          <p>For interactive workflow testing, see
          <xref href="t_test-workflow-repl.dita">Test a workflow in the REPL</xref>.</p>
        </info>
      </step>

    </steps>

  </taskbody>
</task>
