<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE task PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Task//EN" "task.dtd">
<!--
  SEO keyword phrase: write header rule front matter metadata check markdown-validator
  Audience: rule-creator
-->
<task id="t_write-header-rule">
  <title>Write a header rule to check front-matter metadata</title>

  <shortdesc>Header rules check the YAML front-matter metadata at the top of
  your Markdown files. Use them to enforce required fields, expected values,
  date freshness, and naming patterns.</shortdesc>

  <prolog>
    <metadata>
      <keywords>
        <keyword>header rule</keyword>
        <keyword>front matter validation</keyword>
        <keyword>YAML metadata check</keyword>
        <keyword>write rule</keyword>
      </keywords>
      <othermeta name="description"
        content="Write a markdown-validator header rule to check YAML front-matter fields: required fields, exact values, allowed value sets, and date freshness."/>
    </metadata>
  </prolog>

  <taskbody>

    <prereq id="prereq">
      <p>You have an existing rule set file. See
      <xref href="t_create-rule-set.dita">Create a rule set file</xref>. Understand the rule fields before
      proceeding: <xref href="../concepts/c_rule-anatomy.dita">Anatomy of a validation rule</xref>.</p>
    </prereq>

    <steps>

      <step id="step-identify">
        <cmd>Identify the front-matter field you want to check and the editorial
        requirement it must satisfy.</cmd>
        <info>
          <p>Examples:</p>
          <ul>
            <li>The <codeph>description</codeph> field must exist.</li>
            <li>The <codeph>ms.topic</codeph> field must equal
            <codeph>tutorial</codeph>.</li>
            <li>The <codeph>ms.date</codeph> field must be within the last
            365 days.</li>
          </ul>
        </info>
      </step>

      <step id="step-choose-flag">
        <cmd>Choose the flag that matches how you want to process the field
        value.</cmd>
        <info>
          <table>
            <title>Flag selection for header rules</title>
            <tgroup cols="2">
              <colspec colname="use" colwidth="3*"/>
              <colspec colname="flag" colwidth="1*"/>
              <thead>
                <row><entry>You want to check...</entry><entry>Use flag</entry></row>
              </thead>
              <tbody>
                <row>
                  <entry>The field exists (any value is acceptable)</entry>
                  <entry><codeph>check</codeph></entry>
                </row>
                <row>
                  <entry>The field equals a specific value</entry>
                  <entry><codeph>value</codeph></entry>
                </row>
                <row>
                  <entry>The field's date is within N days</entry>
                  <entry><codeph>date</codeph></entry>
                </row>
                <row>
                  <entry>The field matches a regular-expression pattern</entry>
                  <entry><codeph>pattern</codeph></entry>
                </row>
              </tbody>
            </tgroup>
          </table>
        </info>
      </step>

      <step id="step-choose-operator">
        <cmd>Choose the operator and expected value.</cmd>
        <info>
          <ul>
            <li>For <codeph>check</codeph>: use <codeph>"operation": "=="</codeph>
            and <codeph>"value": "true"</codeph>.</li>
            <li>For exact string match: use <codeph>"operation": "=="</codeph>
            and the expected string.</li>
            <li>For allowed-values set: use <codeph>"operation": "[]"</codeph>
            and a comma-separated list in <codeph>value</codeph>.</li>
            <li>For date freshness: use <codeph>"operation": "&lt;"</codeph>
            and the maximum age in days.</li>
          </ul>
        </info>
      </step>

      <step id="step-write-mitigation">
        <cmd>Write a clear, actionable mitigation message.</cmd>
        <info>
          <p>The mitigation message is shown directly to authors when their
          document fails this rule. Write it as an imperative sentence that
          tells them exactly what to do. Compare:</p>
          <ul>
            <li><b>Unclear:</b> "ms.topic value is invalid."</li>
            <li><b>Clear:</b> "Set ms.topic to one of: tutorial, how-to,
            concept, reference."</li>
          </ul>
        </info>
      </step>

      <step id="step-add-to-rule-set">
        <cmd>Add the rule object to the <codeph>header</codeph> array in your
        rule set file.</cmd>
        <info>
          <codeblock xml:space="preserve">{
  "id": 3,
  "name": "ms-topic-must-be-allowed-value",
  "type": "header",
  "query": "ms.topic",
  "flag": "value",
  "operation": "[]",
  "value": "tutorial, how-to, concept, reference",
  "level": "Required",
  "mitigation": "Set ms.topic to one of: tutorial, how-to, concept, reference."
}</codeblock>
        </info>
      </step>

      <step id="step-test">
        <cmd>Test the rule against a document that should pass and a document
        that should fail.</cmd>
        <info>
          <codeblock xml:space="preserve">md-validate validate passing-doc.md --rules rules/tutorial.json
md-validate validate failing-doc.md --rules rules/tutorial.json</codeblock>
          <p>Confirm the passing document scores correctly and the failing
          document shows your mitigation message. For interactive testing,
          see <xref href="t_test-rule-repl.dita">Test a rule in the REPL</xref>.</p>
        </info>
      </step>

    </steps>

  </taskbody>
</task>
