<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE reference PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Reference//EN" "reference.dtd">
<!--
  SEO keyword phrase: md-validate CLI options flags reference
  Audience: user, rule-creator
-->
<reference id="r_cli-options">
  <title>CLI options reference</title>

  <shortdesc>Complete reference for all <codeph>md-validate</codeph> commands
  and options. Use this page to look up the syntax, default values, and effect
  of every command-line flag.</shortdesc>

  <prolog>
    <metadata>
      <keywords>
        <keyword>CLI options</keyword>
        <keyword>md-validate flags</keyword>
        <keyword>command-line reference</keyword>
        <keyword>--rules --format --output --verbose</keyword>
      </keywords>
      <othermeta name="description"
        content="Complete reference for all md-validate command-line options, subcommands, and flags with examples."/>
    </metadata>
  </prolog>

  <refbody>

    <section id="synopsis">
      <title>Synopsis</title>
      <codeblock xml:space="preserve">md-validate [--verbose] [--quiet] COMMAND [OPTIONS]

Commands:
  validate    Validate a Markdown file or directory
  repl        Start the interactive REPL</codeblock>
    </section>

    <section id="global-options">
      <title>Global options</title>
      <p>These options apply to all subcommands and must appear before the
      subcommand name.</p>

      <simpletable id="global-props">
        <sthead>
          <stentry>Option</stentry>
          <stentry>Default</stentry>
          <stentry>Description</stentry>
        </sthead>
        <strow>
          <stentry><codeph>--verbose</codeph>, <codeph>-v</codeph></stentry>
          <stentry>Off</stentry>
          <stentry>Enable DEBUG-level logging. Use this when diagnosing
          unexpected results or rule failures.</stentry>
        </strow>
        <strow>
          <stentry><codeph>--quiet</codeph>, <codeph>-q</codeph></stentry>
          <stentry>Off</stentry>
          <stentry>Suppress all non-error output. Only the exit code indicates
          pass or fail. Useful in CI pipelines that parse exit codes
          only.</stentry>
        </strow>
      </simpletable>
    </section>

    <section id="validate-command">
      <title>validate — Validate a file or directory</title>
      <codeblock xml:space="preserve">md-validate validate TARGET --rules RULES [OPTIONS]</codeblock>

      <simpletable id="validate-props">
        <sthead>
          <stentry>Option</stentry>
          <stentry>Default</stentry>
          <stentry>Description</stentry>
        </sthead>
        <strow>
          <stentry><codeph>TARGET</codeph></stentry>
          <stentry>(required)</stentry>
          <stentry>Path to a <filepath>.md</filepath> file or a directory.
          When a directory is provided, all <filepath>.md</filepath> files
          are validated recursively.</stentry>
        </strow>
        <strow>
          <stentry><codeph>--rules</codeph>, <codeph>-r</codeph></stentry>
          <stentry>(required)</stentry>
          <stentry>Path to the JSON rule set file.</stentry>
        </strow>
        <strow>
          <stentry><codeph>--output</codeph>, <codeph>-o</codeph></stentry>
          <stentry>None (print to stdout)</stentry>
          <stentry>Directory where report files are written. One file is
          created per validated document. The directory is created if it does
          not exist.</stentry>
        </strow>
        <strow>
          <stentry><codeph>--format</codeph>, <codeph>-f</codeph></stentry>
          <stentry><codeph>text</codeph></stentry>
          <stentry>Report format. One of: <codeph>text</codeph> (human-readable
          terminal output), <codeph>json</codeph> (machine-readable JSON object),
          <codeph>csv</codeph> (one row per rule).</stentry>
        </strow>
        <strow>
          <stentry><codeph>--workflows</codeph> / <codeph>--no-workflows</codeph></stentry>
          <stentry>Workflows enabled</stentry>
          <stentry>Controls whether workflow chains are executed after individual
          rule evaluation. Use <codeph>--no-workflows</codeph> to evaluate rules
          only.</stentry>
        </strow>
      </simpletable>
    </section>

    <section id="repl-command">
      <title>repl — Start the interactive REPL</title>
      <codeblock xml:space="preserve">md-validate repl</codeblock>
      <p>Starts the interactive REPL for rule development and debugging. No
      options are required. See the
      <xref href="../../rule-creator-guide/reference/r_repl-commands.dita">REPL commands reference</xref>
      for the list of REPL commands.</p>
    </section>

    <section id="examples">
      <title>Examples</title>

      <codeblock xml:space="preserve"># Validate a single file with text output
md-validate validate article.md --rules rules/tutorial.json

# Validate a directory and save JSON reports
md-validate validate docs/ --rules rules/tutorial.json \
  --format json --output reports/

# Validate quietly (exit code only, no output)
md-validate --quiet validate docs/ --rules rules/tutorial.json

# Validate with debug logging
md-validate --verbose validate article.md --rules rules/tutorial.json</codeblock>
    </section>

  </refbody>
</reference>
