<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE concept PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Concept//EN" "concept.dtd">
<!--
  SEO keyword phrase: markdown-validator known limitations flat DOM XPath negation
  Audience: rule-creator
-->
<concept id="c_known-limitations">
  <title>Known limitations</title>

  <shortdesc>Understanding the current limitations of markdown-validator before
  you write rules saves hours of debugging. Four limitations affect the types
  of rules you can reliably express today.</shortdesc>

  <prolog>
    <metadata>
      <keywords>
        <keyword>known limitations</keyword>
        <keyword>flat DOM</keyword>
        <keyword>no negation operator</keyword>
        <keyword>XPath limitations</keyword>
        <keyword>NLTK requirement</keyword>
      </keywords>
      <othermeta name="description"
        content="Know the current limitations of markdown-validator before writing rules: flat HTML DOM, absence of a negation operator, multi-element equality behavior, and NLTK dependency."/>
    </metadata>
  </prolog>

  <conbody>

    <section id="flat-dom">
      <title>Limitation 1: Flat HTML — within-section queries are not reliable</title>
      <p>markdown-validator renders Markdown to HTML using the standard
      <codeph>markdown</codeph> library. This library produces <b>flat HTML</b>:
      all headings are direct children of <codeph>&lt;body&gt;</codeph>. There are
      no <codeph>&lt;section&gt;</codeph> wrappers that group a heading with its
      content.</p>

      <p>This means XPath queries that rely on containment — "find a link that is
      inside the Prerequisites section" — will not work as intended. The query
      <codeph>.//h2[1]/following-sibling::a</codeph> does not return links
      within the first H2's section; it returns every link anywhere after the
      first H2 in document order.</p>

      <p><b>What to do instead:</b> Write rules that check element presence and
      order using absolute position (for example, <codeph>.//h2[1]</codeph> for
      the first H2), not containment. For sections, count the heading and rely
      on positional predicates.</p>

      <p><b>Planned fix:</b> A structured-DOM parser mode is planned for v0.4.</p>
    </section>

    <section id="no-negation">
      <title>Limitation 2: No negation operator</title>
      <p>There is no <codeph>negate</codeph> field or <codeph>not</codeph>
      operator. Expressing "the title must NOT contain the word 'guide'" requires
      a workflow-inversion workaround that is difficult to read and error-prone.
      See the absence-check pattern in
      <xref href="c_rule-design-patterns.dita">Rule design patterns</xref>.</p>

      <p><b>Planned fix:</b> A <codeph>negate: true</codeph> field on
      <codeph>RuleModel</codeph> is planned for v0.3.</p>
    </section>

    <section id="multi-element-equality">
      <title>Limitation 3: Multi-element equality checks are usually wrong</title>
      <p>When an XPath query returns more than one element and you use
      <codeph>"operation": "=="</codeph>, the evaluator requires <b>every</b>
      element in the result set to equal the expected value. This is almost
      never the intended behavior.</p>

      <p><b>Example of the problem:</b> A rule targeting
      <codeph>".//h2[last()]/preceding-sibling::h2"</codeph> (to find the
      second-to-last H2) returns <i>all</i> H2s before the last one. Requiring
      all of them to equal "Clean up resources" fails on any document with
      more than two H2s.</p>

      <p><b>What to do instead:</b> Target the specific element you want by
      position, not by relative relationship. Use
      <codeph>".//h2[last()-1]"</codeph> to get the second-to-last H2
      directly.</p>
    </section>

    <section id="nltk-required">
      <title>Limitation 4: NLTK language data must be installed separately</title>
      <p>Rules that use the <codeph>s</codeph> (sentence count) or
      <codeph>p&lt;N&gt;</codeph> (part of speech) operators require NLTK
      language corpora that are not included with the pip package. A fresh
      environment will fail with a LookupError on first use of these rules.</p>

      <p><b>What to do:</b> Include the NLTK download step in your team's
      onboarding instructions and CI pipeline. See
      <xref href="../../user-guide/tasks/t_download-nltk.dita">Download NLTK language data</xref>.</p>
    </section>

  </conbody>
</concept>
