<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE concept PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Concept//EN" "concept.dtd">
<!--
  SEO keyword phrase: markdown-validator rule set governance versioning communication
  Audience: rule-creator
-->
<concept id="c_rule-governance">
  <title>Rule set governance and versioning</title>

  <shortdesc>A rule set is a living document. Good governance practices protect
  your authors from unexpected pipeline failures while allowing your editorial
  standards to evolve over time.</shortdesc>

  <prolog>
    <metadata>
      <keywords>
        <keyword>rule governance</keyword>
        <keyword>rule set versioning</keyword>
        <keyword>Required vs Suggested</keyword>
        <keyword>author communication</keyword>
        <keyword>deprecate rule</keyword>
      </keywords>
      <othermeta name="description"
        content="Best practices for managing markdown-validator rule sets: versioning, communicating changes to authors, when to use Required vs. Suggested, and deprecating rules."/>
    </metadata>
  </prolog>

  <conbody>

    <section id="store-in-repo">
      <title>Store the rule set in version control</title>
      <p>Commit rule set files to the repository alongside the content they
      govern, typically under <filepath>rules/</filepath>. This keeps author
      and CI rule sets in sync and makes rollback a simple revert.</p>
    </section>

    <section id="required-vs-suggested">
      <title>Deciding between Required and Suggested</title>
      <p>The level of a rule determines whether authors are blocked or merely
      informed. Use the following criteria:</p>

      <table id="level-criteria">
        <title>Level selection criteria</title>
        <tgroup cols="2">
          <colspec colname="situation" colwidth="3*"/>
          <colspec colname="level" colwidth="1*"/>
          <thead>
            <row>
              <entry>Situation</entry>
              <entry>Level</entry>
            </row>
          </thead>
          <tbody>
            <row>
              <entry>The check enforces a hard contractual requirement (legal,
              accessibility, platform dependency)</entry>
              <entry>Required</entry>
            </row>
            <row>
              <entry>The check enforces a well-established style rule that
              all authors have been trained on</entry>
              <entry>Required</entry>
            </row>
            <row>
              <entry>You are introducing a new rule and want to monitor
              compliance before enforcing it</entry>
              <entry>Suggested (promote to Required after 30–60 days)</entry>
            </row>
            <row>
              <entry>The check is a recommendation that should be visible
              but should not block publication</entry>
              <entry>Suggested</entry>
            </row>
          </tbody>
        </tgroup>
      </table>

      <note type="tip">Introduce new Required rules gradually. Start as
      Suggested, run reports to see how many articles fail, communicate the
      upcoming change to your authors, then promote to Required after the
      team has had time to address the backlog.</note>
    </section>

    <section id="communicating-changes">
      <title>Communicating rule changes to authors</title>
      <p>Authors who are blocked by a new rule they did not expect are
      frustrated. Follow this process when adding or promoting a rule:</p>
      <ol>
        <li>Add the rule as <codeph>Suggested</codeph>.</li>
        <li>Run a report across the repository to identify affected articles
        and their owners.</li>
        <li>Notify authors of the upcoming change with enough lead time to fix
        their articles (at least two weeks for a large repository).</li>
        <li>After the compliance window, change the level to
        <codeph>Required</codeph> and commit the update.</li>
      </ol>
    </section>

    <section id="deprecating-rules">
      <title>Deprecating and removing rules</title>
      <p>When a rule no longer reflects your editorial standards:</p>
      <ol>
        <li>Change the level from <codeph>Required</codeph> to
        <codeph>Suggested</codeph> to stop blocking authors while you
        plan the removal.</li>
        <li>Remove the rule from the rule set file.</li>
        <li>Update your rule set's changelog.</li>
      </ol>
      <p>Do not change a rule's ID once it is in use. If you change the rule
      significantly, treat it as a new rule with a new ID and deprecate the
      old one.</p>
    </section>

    <section id="changelog">
      <title>Maintain a changelog</title>
      <p>Keep a <filepath>CHANGELOG.md</filepath> alongside your rule set file
      to document what changed, when, and why. Authors who receive unexpected
      failures will search for this file first. At minimum, record:</p>
      <ul>
        <li>The date of each change</li>
        <li>Which rules were added, changed, or removed</li>
        <li>Whether a Suggested rule was promoted to Required</li>
        <li>The reason for the change</li>
      </ul>
    </section>

  </conbody>
</concept>
