<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE concept PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Concept//EN" "concept.dtd">
<!--
  SEO keyword phrase: anatomy of a markdown-validator rule fields explained
  Audience: rule-creator
-->
<concept id="c_rule-anatomy">
  <title>Anatomy of a validation rule</title>

  <shortdesc>Every markdown-validator rule is a JSON object with nine fields.
  Understanding what each field does is the foundation for writing rules that
  express your editorial standards accurately.</shortdesc>

  <prolog>
    <metadata>
      <keywords>
        <keyword>rule anatomy</keyword>
        <keyword>rule fields</keyword>
        <keyword>query flag operation</keyword>
        <keyword>mitigation message</keyword>
      </keywords>
      <othermeta name="description"
        content="Understand the purpose of every field in a markdown-validator rule: id, name, type, query, flag, operation, value, level, and mitigation."/>
    </metadata>
  </prolog>

  <conbody>

    <section id="the-nine-fields">
      <title>The nine rule fields</title>

      <codeblock xml:space="preserve">{
  "id":        1,
  "name":      "topic-must-be-tutorial",
  "type":      "header",
  "query":     "ms.topic",
  "flag":      "value",
  "operation": "==",
  "value":     "tutorial",
  "level":     "Required",
  "mitigation":"Set ms.topic: tutorial in the front matter."
}</codeblock>

      <dl>
        <dlentry id="field-id">
          <dt><codeph>id</codeph></dt>
          <dd>A unique integer that identifies this rule. IDs are used in
          workflow definitions to refer to rules. Assign IDs sequentially within
          a rule set and do not reuse them.</dd>
        </dlentry>
        <dlentry id="field-name">
          <dt><codeph>name</codeph></dt>
          <dd>A human-readable label shown in validation reports. Use lowercase
          words separated by hyphens (for example,
          <codeph>description-must-exist</codeph>). Choose a name that reads like
          an assertion so the failure is immediately clear.</dd>
        </dlentry>
        <dlentry id="field-type">
          <dt><codeph>type</codeph></dt>
          <dd>Either <codeph>"header"</codeph> or <codeph>"body"</codeph>. Header
          rules check YAML front-matter; body rules check the rendered HTML. You
          can omit this field if the rule is in the correct section of the rule
          set file — it is injected automatically.</dd>
        </dlentry>
        <dlentry id="field-query">
          <dt><codeph>query</codeph></dt>
          <dd>
            <p>What to look up in the document.</p>
            <ul>
              <li>For <b>header</b> rules: the metadata key name (for example,
              <codeph>"ms.topic"</codeph>).</li>
              <li>For <b>body</b> rules: an XPath expression against the rendered
              HTML (for example, <codeph>"/html/body/h1"</codeph>).</li>
            </ul>
          </dd>
        </dlentry>
        <dlentry id="field-flag">
          <dt><codeph>flag</codeph></dt>
          <dd>How to process the query result before comparing it with
          <codeph>value</codeph>. For header rules, common flags are
          <codeph>value</codeph>, <codeph>check</codeph>, <codeph>date</codeph>,
          and <codeph>pattern</codeph>. For body rules, common flags are
          <codeph>count</codeph>, <codeph>text</codeph>, and <codeph>dom</codeph>.
          See <xref href="../reference/r_flags.dita">Flag reference</xref> for the complete
          list.</dd>
        </dlentry>
        <dlentry id="field-operation">
          <dt><codeph>operation</codeph></dt>
          <dd>The comparison operator applied between the processed query result
          and <codeph>value</codeph>. Examples: <codeph>"=="</codeph> (equals),
          <codeph>"!="</codeph> (not equals), <codeph>"&gt;"</codeph> (greater
          than), <codeph>"[]"</codeph> (contains). See the
          <xref href="../reference/r_operators.dita">Operator reference</xref> for the complete
          list.</dd>
        </dlentry>
        <dlentry id="field-value">
          <dt><codeph>value</codeph></dt>
          <dd>The expected value the query result is compared against. Always a
          string. For numeric comparisons the string is coerced to a number at
          evaluation time. For multi-value checks (with <codeph>"[]"</codeph>),
          use a comma-separated list: <codeph>"guide, article, topic"</codeph>.</dd>
        </dlentry>
        <dlentry id="field-level">
          <dt><codeph>level</codeph></dt>
          <dd>Severity of a failure: <codeph>"Required"</codeph> (blocks the CI
          pipeline) or <codeph>"Suggested"</codeph> (informational, does not block
          the pipeline). Defaults to <codeph>"Required"</codeph> if omitted.</dd>
        </dlentry>
        <dlentry id="field-mitigation">
          <dt><codeph>mitigation</codeph></dt>
          <dd>A plain-English message shown to authors when this rule fails.
          Write the mitigation as a direct instruction: what the author should do
          to fix the problem. This message is the primary communication between
          your rule and your authors — make it clear and actionable.</dd>
        </dlentry>
      </dl>
    </section>

    <section id="how-evaluation-works">
      <title>How evaluation works</title>
      <p>The tool resolves <codeph>query</codeph>, processes the result with
      <codeph>flag</codeph>, applies <codeph>operation</codeph> against
      <codeph>value</codeph>, and returns pass or fail. If the query returns
      nothing (key absent, no XPath matches), the rule fails with the
      <codeph>mitigation</codeph> message.</p>
    </section>

  </conbody>
</concept>
