<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE concept PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Concept//EN" "concept.dtd">
<!--
  SEO keyword phrase: rule set JSON file markdown-validator structure overview
  Audience: rule-creator
-->
<concept id="c_rule-sets-overview">
  <title>Understanding rule sets</title>

  <shortdesc>A rule set is a JSON file that tells markdown-validator what to
  check in a Markdown document. It contains two sections: <codeph>rules</codeph>,
  which defines individual checks, and <codeph>workflows</codeph>, which chains
  rules together with conditional logic.</shortdesc>

  <prolog>
    <metadata>
      <keywords>
        <keyword>rule set</keyword>
        <keyword>JSON rule file</keyword>
        <keyword>header rules</keyword>
        <keyword>body rules</keyword>
        <keyword>workflows</keyword>
      </keywords>
      <othermeta name="description"
        content="Learn how markdown-validator rule sets are structured: the rules section, header vs. body rules, and optional workflow chains."/>
    </metadata>
  </prolog>

  <conbody>

    <section id="rule-set-structure">
      <title>Rule set structure</title>
      <p>A rule set JSON file has the following top-level structure:</p>

      <codeblock xml:space="preserve">{
  "rules": {
    "header": [ ... ],
    "body":   [ ... ]
  },
  "workflows": [ ... ]
}</codeblock>

      <dl>
        <dlentry>
          <dt><codeph>rules.header</codeph></dt>
          <dd>An array of rules that check the YAML front-matter metadata at the
          top of each Markdown file. Use header rules to validate fields like
          <codeph>ms.topic</codeph>, <codeph>ms.date</codeph>,
          <codeph>title</codeph>, and <codeph>description</codeph>.</dd>
        </dlentry>
        <dlentry>
          <dt><codeph>rules.body</codeph></dt>
          <dd>An array of rules that check the document content — headings, section
          structure, text patterns, paragraph length. Body rules use XPath
          expressions to target specific elements in the rendered HTML.</dd>
        </dlentry>
        <dlentry>
          <dt><codeph>workflows</codeph></dt>
          <dd>An optional array of workflow definitions. Workflows chain multiple
          rules together with conditional logic ("if rule A passes, then also check
          rule B"). If you do not need conditional logic, this array can be
          empty or omitted.</dd>
        </dlentry>
      </dl>
    </section>

    <section id="header-vs-body">
      <title>Header rules vs. body rules</title>

      <table id="rule-type-table">
        <title>Header rules vs. body rules</title>
        <tgroup cols="3">
          <colspec colname="aspect" colwidth="2*"/>
          <colspec colname="header" colwidth="3*"/>
          <colspec colname="body" colwidth="3*"/>
          <thead>
            <row>
              <entry>Aspect</entry>
              <entry>Header rules</entry>
              <entry>Body rules</entry>
            </row>
          </thead>
          <tbody>
            <row>
              <entry>What they check</entry>
              <entry>YAML front-matter key-value pairs</entry>
              <entry>Markdown content rendered as HTML</entry>
            </row>
            <row>
              <entry>Query syntax</entry>
              <entry>Metadata key name (for example, <codeph>ms.topic</codeph>)</entry>
              <entry>XPath expression (for example,
              <codeph>/html/body/h1</codeph>)</entry>
            </row>
            <row>
              <entry>Typical use cases</entry>
              <entry>Required fields exist, field values match allowed values,
              date is recent</entry>
              <entry>Heading count, section order, required headings present,
              title starts with keyword</entry>
            </row>
          </tbody>
        </tgroup>
      </table>
    </section>

    <section id="simple-example">
      <title>A minimal rule set example</title>
      <p>This rule set checks two things: the <codeph>ms.topic</codeph>
      front-matter field must equal <codeph>tutorial</codeph>, and the document
      body must contain exactly one H1 heading.</p>

      <codeblock xml:space="preserve">{
  "rules": {
    "header": [
      {
        "id": 1,
        "name": "topic-must-be-tutorial",
        "type": "header",
        "query": "ms.topic",
        "flag": "value",
        "operation": "==",
        "value": "tutorial",
        "level": "Required",
        "mitigation": "Set ms.topic: tutorial in the front matter."
      }
    ],
    "body": [
      {
        "id": 2,
        "name": "must-have-exactly-one-h1",
        "type": "body",
        "query": "/html/body/h1",
        "flag": "count",
        "operation": "==",
        "value": "1",
        "level": "Required",
        "mitigation": "The document must have exactly one H1 heading."
      }
    ]
  },
  "workflows": []
}</codeblock>
    </section>

    <section id="next-steps-ruleset">
      <title>Next steps</title>
      <ul>
        <li>To understand each field in a rule, see
        <xref href="c_rule-anatomy.dita">Anatomy of a validation rule</xref>.</li>
        <li>To create your first rule set file, see
        <xref href="../tasks/t_create-rule-set.dita">Create a rule set file</xref>.</li>
      </ul>
    </section>

  </conbody>
</concept>
