<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE reference PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Reference//EN" "reference.dtd">
<!--
  SEO keyword phrase: markdown-validator REPL commands reference load query eval
  Audience: rule-creator
-->
<reference id="r_repl-commands">
  <title>REPL commands reference</title>

  <shortdesc>Complete reference for all commands available in the
  <codeph>md-validate repl</codeph> interactive session.</shortdesc>

  <prolog>
    <metadata>
      <keywords>
        <keyword>REPL commands</keyword>
        <keyword>load query eval dump get</keyword>
        <keyword>interactive rule testing commands</keyword>
      </keywords>
      <othermeta name="description"
        content="Complete reference for all markdown-validator REPL commands: load, dump, query, get, and eval, with syntax and examples."/>
    </metadata>
  </prolog>

  <refbody>

    <table id="repl-commands-table">
      <title>REPL commands</title>
      <tgroup cols="3">
        <colspec colname="command" colwidth="2*"/>
        <colspec colname="syntax" colwidth="3*"/>
        <colspec colname="description" colwidth="4*"/>
        <thead>
          <row>
            <entry>Command</entry>
            <entry>Syntax</entry>
            <entry>Description</entry>
          </row>
        </thead>
        <tbody>
          <row>
            <entry><codeph>load</codeph></entry>
            <entry><codeph>load &lt;path&gt;</codeph></entry>
            <entry>Load a Markdown file. All subsequent commands operate on
            this file. You can load a new file at any time to switch
            context.</entry>
          </row>
          <row>
            <entry><codeph>dump metadata</codeph></entry>
            <entry><codeph>dump metadata</codeph></entry>
            <entry>Print the loaded file's YAML front matter as a formatted
            JSON object. Use this to confirm which keys are present and their
            exact values before writing header rules.</entry>
          </row>
          <row>
            <entry><codeph>dump html</codeph></entry>
            <entry><codeph>dump html</codeph></entry>
            <entry>Print the rendered HTML of the loaded file's body. Use this
            to see the exact DOM structure that body-rule XPath expressions
            will query.</entry>
          </row>
          <row>
            <entry><codeph>query</codeph></entry>
            <entry><codeph>query &lt;xpath&gt; [flag]</codeph></entry>
            <entry>Run an XPath expression against the loaded file's HTML body.
            Optional flag: <codeph>text</codeph> (default), <codeph>count</codeph>,
            or <codeph>dom</codeph>. Returns the result as a list.</entry>
          </row>
          <row>
            <entry><codeph>get</codeph></entry>
            <entry><codeph>get &lt;key&gt;</codeph></entry>
            <entry>Retrieve the value of a front-matter key. Equivalent to
            <codeph>dump metadata</codeph> for a single key.</entry>
          </row>
          <row>
            <entry><codeph>eval</codeph></entry>
            <entry><codeph>eval &lt;json-rule&gt;</codeph></entry>
            <entry>Evaluate a rule JSON object against the loaded document.
            The rule must be valid JSON on a single line. Returns PASS or
            FAIL with the rule name and, on failure, the mitigation
            message.</entry>
          </row>
          <row>
            <entry><codeph>help</codeph></entry>
            <entry><codeph>help</codeph></entry>
            <entry>List all available commands.</entry>
          </row>
          <row>
            <entry><codeph>quit</codeph></entry>
            <entry><codeph>quit</codeph> or <codeph>exit</codeph></entry>
            <entry>Exit the REPL.</entry>
          </row>
        </tbody>
      </tgroup>
    </table>

    <section id="repl-examples">
      <title>Example session</title>
      <codeblock xml:space="preserve">&gt; load docs/tutorial-deploy-app.md
Loaded: /abs/path/docs/tutorial-deploy-app.md
  Metadata keys: ['title', 'ms.topic', 'ms.date', 'author', 'description']

&gt; get ms.topic
ms.topic: tutorial

&gt; query /html/body/h1 text
Result: ['Tutorial: Deploy a web application']

&gt; query //h2 count
Result: [4]

&gt; query //h2 text
Result: ['Prerequisites', 'Deploy the app', 'Test the deployment',
         'Clean up resources']

&gt; eval {"id":1,"name":"h1-must-start-with-tutorial","type":"body","query":"/html/body/h1","flag":"text","operation":"[:","value":"Tutorial:","mitigation":"H1 must start with 'Tutorial:'"}
PASS: rule id=1 name='h1-must-start-with-tutorial'

&gt; quit</codeblock>
    </section>

  </refbody>
</reference>
