<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE task PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Task//EN" "task.dtd">
<!--
  SEO keyword phrase: download NLTK data markdown-validator sentence POS rules
  Audience: user
-->
<task id="t_download-nltk">
  <title>Download NLTK language data</title>

  <shortdesc>Download the NLTK language corpora required by validation rules
  that check sentence counts or part-of-speech tags. You only need to do this
  once per Python environment.</shortdesc>

  <prolog>
    <metadata>
      <keywords>
        <keyword>NLTK download</keyword>
        <keyword>punkt_tab</keyword>
        <keyword>LookupError</keyword>
        <keyword>sentence count rules</keyword>
        <keyword>part-of-speech rules</keyword>
      </keywords>
      <othermeta name="description"
        content="Download the NLTK language data required by sentence-count and part-of-speech validation rules. Needed once per environment."/>
    </metadata>
  </prolog>

  <taskbody>

    <prereq id="prereq">
      <p>markdown-validator must be installed. See
      <xref href="t_install.dita">Install markdown-validator</xref>.</p>
    </prereq>

    <context id="context">
      <p>Rules that check sentence counts or part-of-speech tags require NLTK
      language data. Without it, those rules fail with
      <codeph>LookupError: Resource punkt_tab not found</codeph>. If your rule
      set does not use <codeph>s</codeph> or <codeph>p&lt;N&gt;</codeph> rules,
      skip this task.</p>
    </context>

    <steps>

      <step id="step-activate">
        <cmd>Activate the virtual environment where markdown-validator is
        installed.</cmd>
        <info>
          <p>On macOS or Linux:</p>
          <codeblock xml:space="preserve">source .venv/bin/activate</codeblock>
          <p>On Windows (PowerShell):</p>
          <codeblock xml:space="preserve">.venv\Scripts\Activate.ps1</codeblock>
        </info>
      </step>

      <step id="step-download">
        <cmd>Download the required NLTK corpora.</cmd>
        <info>
          <codeblock xml:space="preserve">python -m nltk.downloader punkt_tab averaged_perceptron_tagger_eng</codeblock>
          <p>This command downloads two datasets:</p>
          <ul>
            <li><codeph>punkt_tab</codeph> — sentence tokenizer used for sentence-count
            rules</li>
            <li><codeph>averaged_perceptron_tagger_eng</codeph> — part-of-speech tagger
            used for POS rules</li>
          </ul>
        </info>
        <stepresult>NLTK downloads the files to your NLTK data directory
        (typically <filepath>~/nltk_data</filepath> on macOS and Linux, or
        <filepath>%APPDATA%\nltk_data</filepath> on Windows).</stepresult>
      </step>

      <step id="step-verify">
        <cmd>Verify the download succeeded.</cmd>
        <info>
          <codeblock xml:space="preserve">python -c "import nltk; nltk.data.find('tokenizers/punkt_tab'); print('OK')"</codeblock>
        </info>
        <stepresult>The terminal prints <systemoutput>OK</systemoutput>. If it
        prints a LookupError instead, the download did not complete. Run the
        download command again.</stepresult>
      </step>

    </steps>

    <postreq id="postreq">
      <p>Ready to validate:
      <xref href="t_validate-single-file.dita">Validate a single file</xref>.
      If you still see a LookupError, see
      <xref href="../../troubleshooting/ts_nltk-error.dita">Resolve an NLTK LookupError</xref>.</p>
    </postreq>

  </taskbody>
</task>
