<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE task PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Task//EN" "task.dtd">
<!--
  SEO keyword phrase: add markdown-validator GitHub Actions CI workflow
  Audience: user, DevOps
-->
<task id="t_integrate-github-actions">
  <title>Add markdown-validator to a GitHub Actions workflow</title>

  <shortdesc>Create a GitHub Actions workflow file that installs
  markdown-validator, downloads NLTK language data, validates your
  documentation on every pull request, and uploads reports as downloadable
  artifacts.</shortdesc>

  <prolog>
    <metadata>
      <keywords>
        <keyword>GitHub Actions</keyword>
        <keyword>CI/CD integration</keyword>
        <keyword>validate docs pipeline</keyword>
        <keyword>pull request gate</keyword>
      </keywords>
      <othermeta name="description"
        content="Add markdown-validator as a GitHub Actions job to automatically validate Markdown files on every pull request and block merges on Required failures."/>
    </metadata>
  </prolog>

  <taskbody>

    <prereq id="prereq">
      <ul>
        <li>Your documentation repository is hosted on GitHub.</li>
        <li>The rule set file is committed to the repository.</li>
        <li>You have write access to the repository to create workflow files.</li>
      </ul>
    </prereq>

    <context id="context">
      <p>A GitHub Actions workflow runs automatically when you open or update a
      pull request. If the validation step exits with code <codeph>1</codeph>
      (one or more Required rules failed), GitHub marks the check as failed and
      prevents the merge. Authors can see the report in the Actions log or as a
      downloaded artifact.</p>
    </context>

    <steps>

      <step id="step-create-dir">
        <cmd>In your repository, create the directory
        <filepath>.github/workflows/</filepath> if it does not exist.</cmd>
        <info>
          <codeblock xml:space="preserve">mkdir -p .github/workflows</codeblock>
        </info>
      </step>

      <step id="step-create-file">
        <cmd>Create a new file named
        <filepath>.github/workflows/validate-docs.yml</filepath> and paste in
        the following workflow. Do not modify it yet — update the two
        project-specific values in the next step.</cmd>
        <info>
          <codeblock xml:space="preserve">name: Validate documentation

on:
  pull_request:
    paths:
      - 'docs/**/*.md'

jobs:
  validate:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest

    steps:
      - name: Check out repository
        uses: actions/checkout@v4

      - name: Set up Python
        uses: actions/setup-python@v5
        with:
          python-version: '3.12'

      - name: Cache NLTK data
        uses: actions/cache@v4
        with:
          path: ~/nltk_data
          key: nltk-punkt-tagger

      - name: Install markdown-validator
        run: pip install markdown-validator

      - name: Download NLTK language data
        run: |
          python -m nltk.downloader punkt_tab averaged_perceptron_tagger_eng

      - name: Validate documentation
        run: |
          md-validate validate docs/ \
            --rules rules/tutorial.json \
            --format json \
            --output reports/

      - name: Upload validation reports
        if: always()
        uses: actions/upload-artifact@v4
        with:
          name: validation-reports
          path: reports/</codeblock>
        </info>
      </step>

      <step id="step-understand">
        <cmd>Review the non-obvious workflow steps before customizing.</cmd>
        <info>
          <dl>
            <dlentry>
              <dt>Cache NLTK data</dt>
              <dd>Caches the NLTK corpora between runs so the pipeline does
              not re-download them on every pull request.</dd>
            </dlentry>
            <dlentry>
              <dt>Download NLTK language data</dt>
              <dd>Downloads <codeph>punkt_tab</codeph> and
              <codeph>averaged_perceptron_tagger_eng</codeph> for sentence-count
              and part-of-speech rules. Runs even when the cache is warm; the
              downloader skips files already present.</dd>
            </dlentry>
            <dlentry>
              <dt>Validate documentation</dt>
              <dd>Exits with code <codeph>1</codeph> if any Required rule fails,
              marking the GitHub check as failed and blocking the merge.</dd>
            </dlentry>
            <dlentry>
              <dt>Upload validation reports</dt>
              <dd><codeph>if: always()</codeph> ensures the upload runs even
              when validation fails, so authors can download the report without
              scrolling CI logs.</dd>
            </dlentry>
          </dl>
        </info>
      </step>

      <step id="step-customize">
        <cmd>Update the workflow to match your repository's paths and rule set
        location.</cmd>
        <info>
          <p>Change the following values:</p>
          <ul>
            <li><codeph>docs/**/*.md</codeph> — the glob pattern matching your
            documentation files</li>
            <li><codeph>docs/</codeph> (in the validate command) — the directory
            to scan</li>
            <li><codeph>rules/tutorial.json</codeph> — the path to your team's
            rule set file</li>
          </ul>
        </info>
      </step>

      <step id="step-commit">
        <cmd>Commit the workflow file and push the branch.</cmd>
        <info>
          <codeblock xml:space="preserve">git add .github/workflows/validate-docs.yml
git commit -m "Add documentation validation workflow"
git push</codeblock>
        </info>
        <stepresult>GitHub runs the workflow on every subsequent pull request
        that changes files matching the path filter.</stepresult>
      </step>

      <step id="step-verify">
        <cmd>Open a pull request to verify the workflow runs correctly.</cmd>
        <info>
          <p>Navigate to the <b>Actions</b> tab of your repository and select the
          latest workflow run to see the validation output. If the workflow fails,
          the output shows which rules failed and what to fix.</p>
        </info>
      </step>

    </steps>

  </taskbody>
</task>
