<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE task PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Task//EN" "task.dtd">
<!--
  SEO keyword phrase: install markdown-validator Python pip
  Audience: user
-->
<task id="t_install">
  <title>Install markdown-validator</title>

  <shortdesc>Install markdown-validator with pip in a Python virtual environment.
  After installation, the <codeph>md-validate</codeph> command is available from
  your terminal.</shortdesc>

  <prolog>
    <metadata>
      <keywords>
        <keyword>install markdown-validator</keyword>
        <keyword>pip install</keyword>
        <keyword>Python setup</keyword>
        <keyword>virtual environment</keyword>
      </keywords>
      <othermeta name="description"
        content="Step-by-step instructions to install markdown-validator using pip, verify the installation, and set up a development environment."/>
    </metadata>
  </prolog>

  <taskbody>

    <prereq id="prereq">
      <ul>
        <li>Python 3.12 or later must be installed. To check your Python version,
        open a terminal and enter:
        <codeblock xml:space="preserve">python --version</codeblock>
        If Python is not installed or is older than 3.12, download it from
        <xref href="https://python.org" format="html" scope="external">python.org</xref>.</li>
        <li>You need access to a terminal (Command Prompt or PowerShell on Windows,
        Terminal on macOS or Linux).</li>
      </ul>
    </prereq>

    <steps>

      <step id="step-venv">
        <cmd>Create and activate a virtual environment.</cmd>
        <info>
          <p>On macOS or Linux:</p>
          <codeblock xml:space="preserve">python -m venv .venv
source .venv/bin/activate</codeblock>
          <p>On Windows (PowerShell):</p>
          <codeblock xml:space="preserve">python -m venv .venv
.venv\Scripts\Activate.ps1</codeblock>
          <p>When the virtual environment is active, your terminal prompt includes
          <codeph>(.venv)</codeph>.</p>
        </info>
        <stepresult>The virtual environment is active. Packages you install now
        go into this isolated environment.</stepresult>
      </step>

      <step id="step-pip">
        <cmd>Install markdown-validator.</cmd>
        <info>
          <codeblock xml:space="preserve">pip install markdown-validator</codeblock>
        </info>
        <stepresult>pip downloads and installs markdown-validator and its
        dependencies.</stepresult>
      </step>

      <step id="step-verify">
        <cmd>Verify the installation.</cmd>
        <info>
          <codeblock xml:space="preserve">md-validate --version</codeblock>
        </info>
        <stepresult>The terminal displays the installed version number, confirming
        that the tool is ready to use.</stepresult>
      </step>

    </steps>

    <result id="result">
      <p>markdown-validator is installed. You can now run
      <codeph>md-validate validate</codeph> from this terminal session whenever
      the virtual environment is active.</p>
    </result>

    <postreq id="postreq">
      <p>If your team's rule set uses sentence-count (<codeph>s</codeph>) or
      part-of-speech (<codeph>p&lt;N&gt;</codeph>) rules, also run:
      <xref href="t_download-nltk.dita">Download NLTK language data</xref>.</p>
      <p>Ready to validate:
      <xref href="t_validate-single-file.dita">Validate a single file</xref>.</p>
    </postreq>

  </taskbody>
</task>
