<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE task PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Task//EN" "task.dtd">
<!--
  SEO keyword phrase: save validation reports directory markdown-validator
  Audience: user
-->
<task id="t_save-reports">
  <title>Save validation reports to a directory</title>

  <shortdesc>Use the <codeph>--output</codeph> option to write one report file
  per validated document to a directory. This is useful for sharing results with
  your team, uploading reports as CI artifacts, or tracking quality over time.</shortdesc>

  <prolog>
    <metadata>
      <keywords>
        <keyword>save reports</keyword>
        <keyword>--output option</keyword>
        <keyword>report files</keyword>
        <keyword>validation history</keyword>
      </keywords>
      <othermeta name="description"
        content="Use the --output option to save one validation report file per Markdown document for sharing with your team or CI artifact upload."/>
    </metadata>
  </prolog>

  <taskbody>

    <prereq id="prereq">
      <p>Decide on a format for the saved reports before running the command.
      <xref href="t_set-output-format.dita">Set output format</xref> compares the text, JSON,
      and CSV options.</p>
    </prereq>

    <context id="context">
      <p>Use case by format: <b>JSON</b> — CI artifact upload and scripting;
      <b>CSV</b> — quality tracking and spreadsheet import; <b>text</b> — ad-hoc
      team review. The output directory is created automatically if it does not
      exist.</p>
    </context>

    <steps>

      <step id="step-choose-format">
        <cmd>Choose the report format that matches your use case.</cmd>
        <info>
          <dl>
            <dlentry>
              <dt>JSON — for CI artifact upload and machine processing</dt>
              <dd><codeblock xml:space="preserve">md-validate validate docs/ --rules rules/tutorial.json \
  --format json --output reports/</codeblock></dd>
            </dlentry>
            <dlentry>
              <dt>CSV — for quality tracking and spreadsheet import</dt>
              <dd><codeblock xml:space="preserve">md-validate validate docs/ --rules rules/tutorial.json \
  --format csv --output reports/</codeblock></dd>
            </dlentry>
            <dlentry>
              <dt>Text — for human review and sharing</dt>
              <dd><codeblock xml:space="preserve">md-validate validate docs/ --rules rules/tutorial.json \
  --format text --output reports/</codeblock></dd>
            </dlentry>
          </dl>
          <p>Replace <codeph>reports/</codeph> with the path to the directory
          where you want the report files saved.</p>
        </info>
        <stepresult>The tool validates every file and writes one report file
        per document into the output directory. The file extension matches the
        format: <filepath>.json</filepath>, <filepath>.csv</filepath>, or
        <filepath>.txt</filepath>.</stepresult>
      </step>

      <step id="step-review-output">
        <cmd>Open the output directory to confirm the generated files.</cmd>
        <info>
          <p>Each report file is named after the source document. For example,
          validating <filepath>docs/tutorial-deploy-app.md</filepath> with
          <codeph>--format json</codeph> produces
          <filepath>reports/tutorial-deploy-app.json</filepath>. With
          <codeph>--format csv</codeph> it produces
          <filepath>reports/tutorial-deploy-app.csv</filepath>.</p>
          <p>If you validate a directory, the output directory mirrors only the
          filenames — subdirectory paths from the source are not recreated. All
          report files land in the single output directory you specified.</p>
        </info>
      </step>

      <step id="step-name-convention">
        <cmd>Adopt a naming convention for the output directory if you save
        reports from multiple runs.</cmd>
        <info>
          <p>Including a date or build identifier in the directory name makes
          it easy to compare reports across runs:</p>
          <codeblock xml:space="preserve">md-validate validate docs/ --rules rules/tutorial.json \
  --format csv --output reports/2026-03-20/</codeblock>
          <p>For CI pipelines, use the run number or commit SHA to make each
          set of reports uniquely identifiable.</p>
        </info>
      </step>

    </steps>

    <result id="result">
      <p>One report file per validated document is saved in the output
      directory in the format you specified. The exit code is <codeph>0</codeph>
      if all Required rules pass, or <codeph>1</codeph> if any Required rule
      fails — regardless of whether reports are saved.</p>
    </result>

    <postreq id="postreq">
      <p>To upload report files as CI artifacts (so your team can download
      them from the Actions run summary page), see
      <xref href="t_integrate-github-actions.dita">Add markdown-validator to a GitHub Actions workflow</xref>.</p>
    </postreq>

  </taskbody>
</task>
