<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE task PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Task//EN" "task.dtd">
<!--
  SEO keyword phrase: validate directory of Markdown files recursive batch
  Audience: user
-->
<task id="t_validate-directory">
  <title>Validate a directory of Markdown files</title>

  <shortdesc>Run <codeph>md-validate validate</codeph> with a directory path to
  validate all Markdown files in that directory and its subdirectories at once.
  Use this before a release or periodic quality review.</shortdesc>

  <prolog>
    <metadata>
      <keywords>
        <keyword>validate directory</keyword>
        <keyword>batch validation</keyword>
        <keyword>recursive markdown validation</keyword>
        <keyword>documentation repository scan</keyword>
      </keywords>
      <othermeta name="description"
        content="Run markdown-validator against an entire directory to validate multiple Markdown files at once and save a report for each file."/>
    </metadata>
  </prolog>

  <taskbody>

    <prereq id="prereq">
      <p>markdown-validator is installed and the virtual environment is active.
      See <xref href="t_install.dita"/>.</p>
    </prereq>

    <context id="context">
      <p>When you pass a directory path instead of a file path, markdown-validator
      scans every <filepath>.md</filepath> file in that directory recursively.
      It produces one report per file and a summary in the terminal.</p>
      <p>A single failing file sets the exit code to <codeph>1</codeph> for the
      entire run. This is the behavior CI pipelines rely on to gate the merge.</p>
    </context>

    <steps>

      <step id="step-run-dir">
        <cmd>Run the validate command with a directory path.</cmd>
        <info>
          <codeblock xml:space="preserve">md-validate validate docs/ --rules rules/tutorial.json</codeblock>
          <p>Replace <codeph>docs/</codeph> with the path to the directory you
          want to scan and <codeph>rules/tutorial.json</codeph> with your team's
          rule set.</p>
        </info>
        <stepresult>The tool prints a report for each file it validates, followed
        by a summary of how many files passed and failed.</stepresult>
      </step>

      <step id="step-review-summary">
        <cmd>Review the summary at the end of the output.</cmd>
        <info>
          <codeblock xml:space="preserve">Summary: 47 files validated — 45 passed, 2 failed</codeblock>
          <p>Scroll up to find the per-file reports for the two failed files. The
          file path is shown at the top of each report.</p>
        </info>
      </step>

      <step id="step-save" importance="optional">
        <cmd>To save per-file reports, add the <codeph>--output</codeph>
        option.</cmd>
        <info>
          <codeblock xml:space="preserve">md-validate validate docs/ --rules rules/tutorial.json --output reports/</codeblock>
          <p>The tool creates one report file per validated Markdown file in the
          <filepath>reports/</filepath> directory. This is useful for sharing
          results with your team or tracking quality over time. For more about
          saving reports, see <xref href="t_save-reports.dita">Save validation reports to a directory</xref>.</p>
        </info>
      </step>

    </steps>

    <result id="result">
      <p>Every Markdown file in the directory has been validated. Files with
      Required failures are identified in the terminal output and, if you used
      <codeph>--output</codeph>, in the saved report files.</p>
    </result>

  </taskbody>
</task>
